Let's talk about JavaScript
===========================

Douglas Crockford in [*JavaScript: The Good Parts*](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/9780596517748.do):

> JavaScript is an important language because it is the language of the web browser. Its association with the browser makes it one of the
> most popular programming languages in the world. At the same time, it is one of the most despised programming languages in the world. The API
> of the browser, the Document Object Model (DOM) is quite awful, and JavaScript is unfairly blamed. The DOM would be painful to work with in
> any language. The DOM is poorly specified and inconsistently implemented. This book touches only very lightly on the DOM. I think writing a
> Good Parts book about the DOM would be extremely challenging.

...

> The amazing thing about JavaScript is that it is possible to get work done with it without knowing much about the language, or
> even knowing much about programming. It is a language with enormous expressive power. It is even better when you know what you’re
> doing. Programming is difficult business. It should never be undertaken in ignorance.




Variables and Comments
----------------------

### Variables

Variables begin with `var` keyword and so to create one you would write something like so:

    var variable = "variable";

    var variable1, variable2, variable3;

    var myVariable = "my variable",
        yourVariable = "your variable",
        theirVariable = "their variable";

Those are all valid variables, their only difference being in style and that in the second example the variables are not intialized to
any value and therefore will be undefined until they are assigned a value. You may have as many variables as you want belonging to the same `var` statement if they are separated by commas.

Note that, in more precise terminology, what you are doing is assigning a value (or no value at all) to a reference (a variable) and that the act of doing so is a statement. Statements in JavaScript end in semicolons `;`. In many cases you actually don't need the semicolon but as we'll see later this is bad and can easily lead to errors. Always have semicolons at the end of your JavaScript statements!

You may notice that if you leave the `var` keyword out, the variable will still be initialized (as long as it's being assigned a value at the
time you initialize it). At first, it will seem as though there is no difference between the two, however, by leaving the `var` keyword out you have just created a global variable and that is BAD (more on this later). For now, don't leave out the var keyword!


### Comments

Comments begin with two forward slashes `//` and anything on the same line to the right of the slashes will not be interpreted by JavaScript.

    // This is a comment
    var tobias = "One of the best sitcom characters ever!";

    tobias; // "One of the best sitcom characters ever!"

Note it is totally fine to have a comment on the same line as actual code so long as it's all the way to the right of the code you want executed.

You can even have multiline comments!!

    var myVariable = "Some value";

    /*
       noicceeeeeee multiline comment here
       alert("HELLO WORLD");

       the alert function above won't get executed because this is a multiline comment
    */

    myVariable; // "Some value"




Strings and Numbers
-------------------

### Strings

So Far, you've already seen strings. Strings can be anything inside either double or single quotes.

    var myString = "a string!";
    var mySingleQuoteString = ' Another string';

    myString; // "a string!"

    myString.toString(); // "a string!"

    myString.toUpperCase(); "A STRING!"

    // String concatenation
    myString.concat(mySingleQuoteString); // "a string! Another string"
    myString + mySingleQuoteString; // "a string! Another string"

    typeof myString; // "string"
    myString instanceof String; // false

The last statement there `myString instanceof String;` is false. It may seem really weird that it is false, but it is because we did not use the `new` keyword to initialize a new `String` object.

    var myString = new String("a string!");

    myString instanceof String; // true

    myString; // String

    myString.valueOf(); // "a string!"

Note that `var myString = "a string!";` and `var myString = new String("a string!");` are different. The first returns a string literal and the second returns a JavaScript object of the `String` class. Although they may seem the same, they are not treated the same by JavaScript. They actually both share and have access to the exact same methods but a string literal is different than an instance of the `String` class.


### Numbers

In JavaScript, the data type `Number` is actually a little different than most programming language's version of a numerical data type. In JavaScript, `Number` is the only number type. There is no distinction between a floating point decimal and an integer. This means that `1` and `1.0` are the same. Many other languages (everyone that I've ever used) has a distinction here, which means if you want to do arithmetic involving a decimal point, you'd have to explicitly specify that it is a float or use some conversion methods. This is avoided in JavaScript and actually saves a lot of headaches.

For instance, if I open my interactive ruby shell up you would notice something like this:

	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :001 > 10 / 3
	 => 3
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :002 > 10.0 / 3
	 => 3.3333333333333335

	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :003 > (10).is_a? Integer
	=> true 
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :004 > (10).is_a? Fixnum
	=> true
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :005 > (10).is_a? Float
	=> false 

	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :006 > (10.0).is_a? Float
	=> true
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :007 > (10.0).is_a? Fixnum
	=> false
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :008 > (10.0).is_a? Integer
	=> false

	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :009 > (10).class
	 => Fixnum 
	ruby-1.9.2-p290 :010 > (10.0).class
	 => Float 

That's a lot of different classes and data types, and performing math operations on the different data types results in different values. 

+1 for JavaScript just having `Number`!

	10 / 3;
	// 3.3333333333333335

	10.0 / 3;
	// 3.3333333333333335

	typeof 10; // "number"
	typeof 10.0; // "number"

Ahh, that's nice and easy, we don't need to worry about a distinction!







